Africa has two Rift Valleys, one physical, the other psychological. Tourists visit and exclaim over the first. Students of African affairs would be well advised to ponder on the second. This psychological Great Divide is the most important thing in Africa today. It cracks the continent in two, and, above all, it sharply separates British territories in Africa from one another. On one side stand the Union of South Africa, the Rhodesias and Nyasaland, Kenya: with great economic potentialities, already relatively far advanced along the industrial road, but at the moment in the throes of what could become the worst race clash in history. On the other side are the territories that comprise British West Africa: also with considerable economic potentialities, not as yet much advanced industrially, the scene of political experiments that some deem mischievous, but at the moment appearing to hold out more hope for the future of race relations than any other part of Africa.

The Great Divide, it must be emphasised, is psychological, not simply geographical. Tanganyika, despite its close physical proximity to Kenya, belongs with West Africa rather than with the so-called “white settler” countries. So, at least in spirit, do the three British protectorates of Bechuanaland, Basutoland and Swaziland; so does Uganda. The issue is really one of attitudes: and the question is how long two very different attitudes to the all-important problem of race relations can continue to co-exist in the different British territories in Africa.

Nothing is more astonishing than to pass from either of the Rhodesias, or from Kenya, to British West Africa. It is like entering a different world. Suddenly you are in a world of black men—which is absurd, for in the Rhodesias there are 20 Africans to each European, in Kenya 125 Africans to each European. The real difference is that there the Africans were merely a background; here they fill the background and the foreground as well. Customs officials, health inspectors, policemen, soldiers, MPs, lawyers, teachers, Cabinet Ministers—all, or nearly all, are black. The most striking thing is the relations between white and black in these West African colonies. They are not merely good: they are cordial. ■
