The successful production of a bomb relying on the splitting of the atom for its explosive force is, no doubt, a triumph for sustained and co-ordinated scientific research. If this new and enormously potent source of power can now be harnessed to something more useful than the devastation of cities, it may make possible strides in material welfare larger than any yet dreamed of. But to the great mass of ordinary people it is just one more, the largest and most terrible, of the horrors of war, one more weapon of destruction to which there is no answer, one more terror which it is better to have on our side, but best not to have at all.

It was known experimentally before the war that the atom of uranium could be split by bombarding it with neutrons, with a great release of energy. But before this knowledge could be applied, three major difficulties had to be removed. First, the active element forms only an infinitesimal part of the raw material, and colossal quantities would have to be treated before a significant volume of the active substance would be available. This, presumably, is the purpose of the enormous and expensive plants in the United States.

Secondly, bulky and delicate apparatus was necessary for the bombardment with neutrons. Before the splitting process could be moved out of the laboratory and put within a bomb-case, much smaller and more portable apparatus would have to be designed, and some means would have to be evolved whereby the reaction would start when it was designed to and not before. These problems have now evidently been solved, but by what means has not been revealed.

For sheer destruction, for making a big bang and a big blast, answers to these two problems were enough. But for any constructive use, the third and potentially most difficult problem is to find means of harnessing and directing the release of power when it occurs. If a quantity of the active substance as big as a pea can make a crater large enough to hold a house, it will obviously not be easy to find an explosion chamber strong enough to retain the energy released and make it turn wheels. It will be very interesting to see whether one-tenth as many scientists are mobilised, or one-hundredth part of the money is spent, to make the new discovery constructive and useful as have been lavished on it as a weapon of death. ■
