Though the advances made in the development of atomic weapons have always gained more publicity, the Atomic Energy Commission has never failed to emphasise the importance it attaches to developing the peaceful potentialities of this major war industry. Many of the commission’s military undertakings will, of course, eventually have peacetime applications: this is especially true of the various types of atomic-powered engines. In its latest report, covering the last six months of 1952, the commission reveals that assembly of the power unit for the submarine Nautilus has nearly been completed on dry land; contracts have been let for the development of engines for larger naval vessels, such as aircraft carriers; and facilities for testing nuclear power plants for aircraft are being constructed.

But in this report the commission is also able to say that progress in the non-military field has been greater than ever before in a similar period. Since the commission’s Office of Industrial Development was opened last May, it has been approached by 225 private concerns. More important, the results of surveys being conducted by ten private companies, working in pairs, indicate that within a few years it may be possible to build nuclear reactors that will supply power to industry at economic rates, provided that the government undertakes to buy the chief by-product, plutonium. One team has now got ahead of its competitors; the Dow Chemical and Detroit Edison Companies have announced that by next January they expect to be ready to build their own atomic plant and to finance it privately, supplying Detroit with commercial power within five years.

There is, however, another hurdle besides cost to be got over before private industry can get its hands on atomic power. Mainly for reasons of security the McMahon Act expressly forbids private ownership of nuclear reactors. Such legal questions as patent rights, contract arrangements and safety precautions must also be considered before private development of atomic energy can go much further. When the matter of amending the McMahon Act does come up, it is probable that the question of exchanging information with other countries will also be discussed again. ■
