THE completed draft of the Administration’s Currency and Banking Bill, approved by the Senate caucus and adopted as the official basis of work in the Upper Chamber, is now definitely under debate, with every prospect of passage within a month, and perhaps considerably sooner. After it has been adopted, only a few days will, according to current expectation, be required for work in conference between the two Houses, and the Bill will then no doubt become law. Few now seriously doubt that the measure in some form will go to the Statute books by January 1st. If their expectation be correct, the most interesting phase of the banking situation now is not found in the terms of the Bill itself, or in the character of the debate regarding it, but in the general situation created by it and in the process of organisation which must immediately set in.

That the measure will give rise to sweeping changes in the national banking system (more important than any that have been witnessed for a long time) is the general and well-founded opinion of those who are familiar with present conditions. The working of the measure will, moreover, alter the financial relations between the United States and foreign countries to a very considerable extent. As soon as the measure is adopted, it will be necessary for the Secretary of the Treasury and some assistants selected by him to begin at once the organisation of the Federal reserve banks provided for in the Act. It would now seem that the number of these banks is likely to be about ten.

In effecting this organisation, it will be necessary immediately to get into communication with every national bank (7,500 in all) in the United States, and to learn their disposition regarding membership. Taking the banks that determine to go into the system, it would then be necessary to make divisions of the country, assigning each bank to a place in some one of these divisions. This will necessitate the ascertainment of currents of exchange, movements of funds, and relationships between banks, in order to make certain the proper location to be assigned to banks in the effort to place them in such way as to avoid disturbance to the operations so far as practicable. There is nothing in the Bill that requires the mapping out of the districts upon a basis of equality of area or of banking capital.

When the country has been divided up into districts in this way, the next step to be taken will be the establishment of the Federal reserve banks upon a basis of capital to be contributed by each of the member banks already existing which have certified their intention of joining the organisation. This is a purely domestic matter, and one which will not prove of much interest to the average man, since the reserve banks are to deal only with banks, and are not to do a general business with individuals. ■
