Herr Ulbricht’s coup is, as the West has seen and noted, a confession that the east German state has signally failed to win its people’s loyalty. Seen from the start as an imposition from outside, the Democratic Republic has carried the political vices of the communist state—the arbitrary justice, the social and economic pressures to conform—as far as they could be taken with the escape hatch still open. In economic reconstruction it had a far worse start than west Germany. Drained since of a large proportion of its most valuable working population, no wonder it shows no signs of keeping pace with west Germany’s expansion, let alone catching up. Berlin, gateway to the richer, freer West, not only for refugees, but for news and the personal contacts which undermine the very basis of communist power, has been the yeast in the east German ferment.

For Herr Ulbricht last Sunday’s measures thus had a defensive character, but to Berliners they looked like an attack. Despite the difference between the two halves of the city in currency, and still more in politics, Berlin, under four-power rule, remained one city to a remarkable extent. The eastern workers who until last Sunday crossed each day to the west to work, and those who went the other way, were only the most obvious element in a constant flow of people and knowledge from which only the politically prominent were excluded. Now, though the east Germans emphasise that west Berliners can meet their families in east Berlin, the chance of getting a breath of fresh air in the west is gone.

West Berlin’s economy and western ties are still untouched, but a blow has been struck at its morale, for if Berlin has been a thorn in Herr Ulbricht’s flesh, its function of bridge between the two Germanies has also sustained the hopes of the Berliners. Only the hope of unity after all makes any sense of their weird island situation. It has been a nasty shock, and both east and west Berliners first reacted by going to the new barriers to look and sometimes to protest and argue. ■
