NOT since the Middle Ages have men scanned the sky so eagerly for portents. The successful launching of the world's first artificial satellite is enough to stretch anyone's imagination. Some of this week's zestful speculations—and some of the more cautious appraisals too—will no doubt be proved false in time; but there are certain things that can and should be said now. A milestone in human history has been passed. True, the launching of satellites was already listed, almost prosaically, among the projects of the International Geophysical Year. But the impact of the event, now it has happened, is still impressive. The Russian scientists deserve all the congratulations showered upon them.

The layman, however, having duly hailed a scientific feat, finds he has more immediate things to think about than space-ship tickets. However loudly his more venturesome fellows are now baying for the (real) moon, the plain man's first concern is to establish, in plain language, what it will all mean to the earthbound nations, not in the conjectural future, but in the next few months and years. His questions are blunt. Is this a new military threat? Has it upset the uneasy balance of power? Will it increase tension, or could it help to transform and moderate international rivalry? Or is it in sober fact almost irrelevant to the ordinary man's hopes of peace and plenty?

The impact of the little ball in the sky on the fate of the man on the ground is still indirect and uncertain; but it is certainly important. In the free world, there is little tendency to shrug off the Russian achievement—and, where there is any tendency to such complacency, there ought not to be. Among the rulers of the communist world, there is a natural, amplified jubilation. “The world is astounded by the stupendous victory,” was the caption that Pravda set this week above a page full of photographic reproductions of the banner headlines that had flared in western newspapers. While others grope, the official communist interpretation rings out as clear as the first “blips.” The event, it is claimed, proves not merely the actual superiority of Soviet science, but the inherent superiority of the communist system.

This claim would be more convincing if some of Russia's older satellites were in better shape. A skyful of balls will not solve Mr Kadar's problems, or Mr Gomulka's. The sight of the whizzing “moon” punctually keeping to an announced timetable is superb; but down below, in the world hitherto known as the Soviet sphere (how many familiar terms may now have to be adjusted?), timetables are rare and risky, transit is often slow and inefficient, and even five-year plans sometimes fail to run their predestined course. True, it is not only in communist countries that gulf yawns between the grandeurs of science and the petty miseries of life. But if the superiority of a system is to be gauged by material standards in general, the lead of the free West remains unchallenged; and one wonders if the average Soviet citizen would merely glow with a purer pride if he knew how many hundreds of millions of pound's worth of the fruits of his labour his masters have put into their “moon” project.

These vast sums have not been extracted from Russia's spartan economy just to satisfy eager boffins. The development of the satellite is intimately linked with that of long-range rockets. General Blagonravov may have been assuring Americans that they have “nothing to fear”; but in Moscow General Pokrovsky has announced that the satellite was shot into its orbit by a multi-stage rocket 25 per cent more powerful than the one tested in August as an inter-continental thermo-nuclear weapon. A Soviet academician has pointed out that the new sight and sound in the skies will dispose of any lingering scepticism over Russia's claim about the inter-continental missile. Mr Khrushchev has added his own strident (and disingenuous) note, telling the West to scrap its bombers. If, after all this, any doubt remained whether the new satellite had any military relevance, it was removed when America announced on Tuesday its readiness to discuss the international regulation of space missiles with Russia (though not behind its allies' backs).

Yet, given the general acceptance of the claims put forward by Moscow in August, the appearance of the satellite does not present a novel military threat. The military deductions now to be drawn are basically the same as they were in August; there is just that much more firm ground on which to base them. It is in the political rather than the military sphere that the blip resounds most urgently.

MR KHRUSHCHEV and his followers have scored a unique prestige and propaganda victory. Not even Mr Michael Todd has yet contrived to send a son et lumière show around the world in 95 minutes, carrying to every centre of population an unmistakable “message”: Russia is mighty, communism gets results. Admittedly, the impact will vary from place to place. Inside the Soviet Union, Mr Khrushchev's critics will be confounded, and his difficulties eased, at least until the novelty wears off. In Warsaw, Budapest and East Berlin, the blip will not drown out the deep rumble of discontent among people who know the dark side of the communist moon, and have had some chance of comparing it with the glow that freedom casts. In contrast, the effect should be strong among those Asians and Africans who, never having experienced communist totalitarianism, are tempted to see it as a potent, even if bitter, medicine for their economic ills. This week the scurrying ball has sped through all their skies, squeaking its simple message: We Russians, a backward people ourselves less than a lifetime ago, can now do even more spectacular things than the rich and pompous West—thanks to communism.

A second message has also girdled the globe, emanating not from the satellite but from the capitals of the free world, yet further enhancing Russia's prestige. The West's scientists have been taken by surprise, its political leaders shaken and in some cases alarmed. Moscow is gleefully making the most of every wild or nervous utterance. It is naturally eager to press the argument that reliance on American protection is no longer of any avail to small countries, that the time has come to denounce alliances and liquidate America's bases in Europe and Asia. In strictly military terms, this argument is nonsense. If Russia continues to reject any dependable formula for disarmament, and if there is to be a period during which it alone can brandish the inter-continental missile, then there will be only one force able to restrain it from expanding its domains by proxy wars or political pressure. That deterrent force comprises the aircraft and shorter-range missiles which could strike back at Russia from many directions—so long as the network of allied bases in Europe and Asia exists. Until the Soviet mastery of long-range rockets is matched and counter-balanced, the retention of a chain of bases, too numerous and scattered for Russia to knock them all out by a sudden onslaught, is the most vital element of the free world's defences. Certainly nothing is more essential to the survival in freedom of small peripheral countries which might otherwise be harried and cowed into subjection by the communist powers—though this reasoning will scarcely be uppermost in the minds of peoples who are already either attracted or overawed by communist feats. Soviet military might is incontestable, and the slide from appeasement into surrender is as slippery as ever it was.

With their satellite and with their long-range missile, the Russians have pulled off a spectacular feat. Only a human ostrich, stubbornly refusing to face disturbing facts, would ascribe their success to captured scientists from Peenemünde or Cambridge, or to the pilfering of western secrets by espionage. A more decisive factor was surely the ability of a totalitarian regime to concentrate a vast amount of talent and resources on one group of projects. A free society has difficulty in achieving so much concentration—especially when the projects are essentially military and political, with little bearing on economic progress or welfare. And, in any society, it is better in the long run not to lavish paint on a few Potemkin villages, but to improve the drains in real ones. This applies most particularly to backward countries, whose problems cannot be solved by spectacular showpieces, but only by an advance on a broad front, with patient improvement of the villager's lot matching the progress of industry.

It is, however, not on the fascinating sight of the Soviet satellite, but on what lies behind it—on that more enduring constellation, the Great Bear—that eyes should now be riveted. Concentration of effort alone is not enough to bring off such a theatrical coup. The blip is a dramatic reminder of the Russians' great advances in technological education. Mr Geoffrey Lloyd rightly pointed out on Wednesday that it symbolises a challenge which the free nations dare not ignore. The shock of its appearance in the sky ought to be a very healthy one. There is no reason—and little inclination—to be panicky, but every reason to seize the chance of overcoming inertia and launching, not “crash programmes,” but vigorous new assaults on a whole range of obstacles to the western world's technical and economic advance. This is the moment to reappraise the problem of technical training; to have another go at all the “restrictive practices,” using the term in its widest sense, which impede the translation of new technology into everyday life; to emphasise that the communist countries' eagerness to learn what the can from the free world is a compliment that could, with advantage and without shame, be repaid more actively.

It is an apt moment, too, for some brisk reappraisal of defence arrangements. The jar felt by the Americans will, one sincerely hopes, jolt them into ending the tragi-comic rivalries between their armed services which must bear part of the blame for Russia's capture of the lead in rocketry. In this country, the new orb that has swum into British skies ought to dispel once and for all the mystical blur that still surrounds the concept of “greatness.” The fee for admission to the club of super-powers has been raised; hydrogen bombs alone will not pay it; and Britain has neither the means, nor any good reason, to join Russia and America in their new lonely eminence. But what it has to offer to the common defence of freedom—as a partner, not as a proud lone wolf—is all the more valuable to an America that has been shaken, since August, out of several complacent assumptions.

IN the sphere of defence, the meaning of the writing in the sky is not that Britain too must reach for outer space, but that the Atlantic alliance must henceforth be an uninhibited one. It is hard to muster any argument for putting national “security” fences round secrets which the Russians evidently already know. “Security” means insecurity, if it hampers (and makes more costly) the joint task of keeping abreast of Soviet military power. If the blips from the sky make that clear to all concerned, they will have transmitted a very useful message—and exemplified, though in an unexpected way, the old adage that it may take a threat from outer space to frighten the nations into one another's arms. ■
