The inability of the three main public opinion polls to see the Eisenhower landslide coming seems, to the layman, a far greater confession of failure than the outright false prophecies of the much closer election of 1948. Not one of the poll-takers was willing to trust his own figures, all of which gave General Eisenhower a substantial lead over Governor Stevenson; all three refused to pick the winner. The joker this year, as in 1948, was the “undecided” voter. But it was precisely Dr Gallup’s diligent attempt to learn from the mistakes he made in allocating the undecided vote in 1948 which led him astray this time. Instead of splitting it evenly, as he did then, he gave the lion’s share to the Democrats. It was this which brought Governor Stevenson’s total up to 49 per cent, or even 50 per cent, and prompted Dr Gallup to prophesy a nip-and-tuck race. His only satisfaction is that for the first time it was the Republican, rather than the Democratic, vote which was put too low. The prophet may have been wrong twice, but at least he has been wrong impartially.

No one should underestimate the difficulties of predicting a presidential election result. The poll-taker must make his way through a quagmire of uncertainties: the refusal of many voters to make up their minds in time or to deal candidly with interviewers; the impossibility of spotting in advance those who will not vote; the enormous complication of the electoral, as opposed to the popular, vote. The Gallup poll this time stayed within, though only just within, the four per cent error it claims is justifiable in predicting the division of the popular vote. What must almost make a serious and conscientious poll-taker change his profession is that the light-hearted “cigarette poll,” of the number of identical Eisenhower and Stevenson cigarettes sold, gave the General a lead in 40 states with an electoral vote of 461.

Sheer lack of faith, which robbed the polls of the honour they might have had, also clouded the debut of Univac, the room-size electronic brain which the Columbia Broadcasting System consulted on election night. The computer, whose “memory” had been stuffed with statistics of past elections, calculated on the basis of the first 3,000,000 ballots that General Eisenhower would win 33 million votes, carrying 43 states with 438 electoral votes. This was an estimate of startling accuracy, for the General actually received 442 electoral votes, but those in charge refused to credit it. Instead they made the machine “forget” enough of its teaching to go on predicting a close race long after Governor Stevenson’s defeat seemed inevitable to non-electronic judgment. Crestfallen humans may be glad to know that when newspaper editors were asked who would win in their states, an electoral vote of 357 for the General was predicted. ■
