This year the Volkswagenwerk GmbH of Wolfsburg near Hanover, the only motor factory in the world that nobody owns, is to bring into production about 150,000 square metres more factory space, increasing its effective manufacturing area by about 60 per cent. No additional capital will be raised from outside for this expansion. Since the Volkswagenwerk has no idea who its absent shareholders may eventually turn out to be, it is hardly in a position to complicate this comfortable mystery further by acquiring fresh ones. Secondly, there is no effective market in Germany for new industrial capital. This expansion will be financed in the same way that most re-equipment since the war has been financed by the Volkswagenwerk and other German industrial concerns—out of profits.

In the German home market today a standard Volkswagen costs 4,400 DM (£375) and a de luxe “export” model 5,400 DM (£460). Both are cheaper than their domestic competitors, such as the General Motors Opel or the Ford Taunus. Both remain in demand in a market that otherwise seems to be softening fast. Other makers during recent months have cut prices heavily and worked short time. Volkswagen prices have been shaved too but the management insists that there is still a six months’ delay in home deliveries, while other German cars can be driven straight out of the showroom, and that it has firm orders covering production for a year ahead. In 1952 the factory turned out 136,000 units, about 120,000 being cars and the remainder transporters; the total represented about 35 per cent of German production of cars and light commercial vehicles.

If the car market in Germany behaves as it has done in France and is doing in Britain, it must become increasingly competitive this year. The Volkswagenwerk seems well placed; it has probably been doing more self-financing at the consumer’s expense than most of its competitors, and it has successfully created a powerful production organisation. If the time comes to cut prices closer to manufacturing costs, it may have a larger margin to cut than its rivals. But it will also have a larger capacity to keep busy. In January it produced 14,500 units, and it expects output to continue at about that rate, making about 170,000 units for 1953 as a whole. ■
