The coal industry is one step nearer the precipice. Yesterday the delegate conference of miners decided unanimously to refuse assent to any lengthening of the working day, to adhere to the principle of a national wage agreement for a national minimum, and to refuse assent to any proposals for reducing wages. The Conference carefully avoided any formal rejection of the Commission’s report; they have decided that a fresh Conference should meet as soon as it can be arranged, and have invited the owners to meet their leaders. Thus the door is to be kept open for negotiation, but the two essential features of the Commission’s plan—a reduction of wages and minima varying in the different districts—are turned down.

If the decision on these last two points is final, it must precipitate a dispute from which, as the wiser men among them well know, the miners themselves are likely to be the chief sufferers. A stoppage of the British mining industry at the present juncture would be a God-send to the German and other mining districts of Europe, and would lose us markets, some of which we might never regain. This might well have been the consequence of the dispute of 1921 but for the fact that, fortunately for Great Britain, the economic difficulties of the continent meant that the European coalfields were not ready to profit by our misfortune.

A general strike in support of the miners would be a disaster for the country. But short of a political revolution, the trade union world cannot expect that it can extort nationalisation by such means. It is, in any case, quite clear that the leaders of the labour movement have no faith in this method of procedure; nor do they believe that the organisation which they have built up will stand the strain of such a conflict under present conditions. They are, therefore, not unnaturally anxious to avoid any action which would prove the futility of the General Council, as the events of April, 1921, proved the futility of the Triple Alliance. ■
