Opinion is for the moment divided on the place of electronic calculating methods in ordinary business. A year or so ago, a suggestion that one of those thinking robots, the electronic brains, should be put to tasks so mundane as the counting of pounds, shillings and pennies for a weekly wage packet would have been greeted with general scepticism. Now that it has actually happened, preconceived opinions about the type of machine suitable for office and accounting work have received a severe jolt. For the past month, the wages of the bakery staff of J. Lyons, Ltd., and a good many routine office calculations besides, have been worked out on a full-sized electronic computor at Cadby Hall. To Lyons, the introduction of electronic computing on this singularly practical scale appeared the logical step to take if the company’s accounting methods were to be kept streamlined and up-to-date. As other specialists in business methods did not see eye to eye with Lyons on this matter at the time, the company was driven to designing and building its own computor.

Is this the first step in an accounting revolution or merely an interesting and expensive experiment? There are those who do not believe in the desirability of introducing anything as esoteric as electronics into business routine at all. Others believe that there is a limited field for electronic methods, provided that they fit into, and do not disrupt, established business systems. But there is a third group—of which Lyons is one—who consider that a major revolution in office methods may be possible. This revolution would involve scrapping the greater part of the established punch card calculating routine and substituting a single “electronic office” where the giant computor would perform internally all the calculations needed for a whole series of book-keeping operations, printing the final answer in and on whatever form was required.

The advantages that the computor has to offer are two; speed and some measure of intelligence. It is speed on a scale that baffles the imagination, where units are counted in millionths of a second and pulses travel through the labyrinthine circuits at the speed of light. As for the computor’s intelligence, it can discriminate so that the same routine is not blindly followed on every figure that enters the machine. The co-ordinating sections of the computor will test one pattern of impulses against another, to decide what kind of operation needs to be carried out on any given piece of data.

Any business handling large numbers of figures would find such capabilities attractive. Electronic computors were essential for the development of atomic physics and are rapidly becoming a necessity for aircraft and missile development. Might they not also have a valuable, if less spectacular, contribution to make to improving business efficiency? Lyons has 33,000 employees, and when their weekly wage packets are made up, 20 different items have to be added or deducted before the net pay can be determined in numbers of notes and coins to be handed over. In addition, the company wants running totals of the amounts of coin needed, the number of insurance stamps, and of each of the 20 items that go to decide net pay.

To save time and labour is always worth while. But what may be more important in the long run is the prospect of doing calculations on electronic computors that would simply not be possible by normal methods because of the time that they would take. This has opened up fresh fields in science; it may conceivably do the same in business. Lyons, for example, has 230 teashops carrying a wide range of perishable stocks. If stock control and ordering for these teashops is handled by the computor, it should be possible to have a much more accurate idea of the stocks carried and needed at any given moment, and the waste that is at present unavoidable could be cut down.

Many businesses, the banks among them, handle vast quantities of figures. It would be possible to handle all the account-posting operations of the banks by computors, which are quite capable of holding details of individual accounts in their memory stores and operating on them as required. Insurance companies handling large numbers of premiums and, in the United States, even national magazine companies with an impressive total of subscriptions, are considering the possibility of installing computors to handle their calculations. American mail order companies dealing with exceptionally heavy seasonal peaks handle the extra volume of ordering, stock control and mailing on a computor, and one airline booking system is run in this fashion, giving an instantaneous check on the number of seats sold and seats available on any given flight.

For practical business purposes, it can be assumed that there is no limit to the computors’ appetite for work; half a day should be sufficient to handle Lyons’ entire payroll for the week. But there is this drawback: a full-sized computor contains 4,000 to 5,000 valves and thousands of other small electronic components. Although there are no moving parts to go wrong, the law of averages seems to dictate that some of the myriad components will occasionally fail, and scientists who work regularly on computors rely on the machine being available for at best only 80 per cent of its theoretical working time. Repairs are usually quick and easy, but it becomes obvious that should there be a major breakdown, business routine could be thrown into chaos since by no stretch of imagination could the staff make up for the work lost on the computor.

Computor developments are being followed with interest and with some understandable apprehension by the companies that now supply the bulk of the business machines in use. If Lyons’ example were to be followed widely, a big section of their market would be cut from beneath them. Their answer has been to produce a poor man’s computor, a machine that calculates electronically but has neither the ability to store data nor the power to plan its own operations that are peculiar to a full-sized electronic brain. The business machine companies argue from their long experience of the market that more complicated and versatile computors are unnecessary unless the most abstruse scientific calculations are involved.

The exciting feature of an electronic office is its flexibility; the computor is an all-purpose machine that can switch from one type of work to another in the time in which it takes to erase the pulses of the old job from its memory. It will do all the work of a business, its scientific calculations, its routine office accounting, and its occasional costing analyses as each comes round, and it will take in its stride all the awkward exceptions that crop up in every batch of routine calculations. Lyons’ possible willingness to supply versions of Leo to interested customers introduces competition from a totally unexpected source. The electronic office might mean a revolution in methods just as remarkable, and a great deal more violent, than that which followed the Prudential’s experiment. ■
