Last week consent judgments were negotiated without going to trial in two long-standing anti-trust suits against the American Telephone and Telegraph Company and the International Business Machines Corporation. A third concerned with the licensing of radio and television patents by the Radio Corporation of America may also be settled. These decrees are regarded by the Department of Justice as long steps forward in its programme to “open up the electronics field” to greater competition and to encourage the expansion of the electronics industry.

AT and T, “the world’s largest corporate enterprise,” commonly known as the Bell system, consists of the Western Electric Company, which manufactures the telephone equipment; Bell Laboratories, Inc., which carry on research and development; and the twenty-one Bell telephone operating companies, which provide a national telephone service. AT and T and Western Electric have now agreed to license any American company to use all of their existing patents and those they may acquire in the future, and to provide the necessary technical “know how.” In addition to the inventions of the Bell system itself, patents released by the decree include those covering the development of colour television and transistor radios.

The main effect of the second decree is to force IBM to offer for outright sale all of its tabulating machines, electronic computers and huge electronic processors of data (the so-called “electronic brains” costing over $40,000 a month to rent) that were formerly only hired to customers. The company must also license all of its existing patents on these machines, as well as any new patents it may acquire or apply for during the next five years.

Complex electronic controls and data processing systems are the key to the growth of the more flexible—and therefore the most significant—forms of automation in industry. It is the firms making this equipment which should be most stimulated by access to basic patents and technology that were formerly secret. But the smaller firms in the electronics industry still have to prove the government’s contention that compulsory licensing of patents will lead to a more rapid advance than the financial incentives of the patent monopolies which are now being relinquished by the big research laboratories. ■
