There was a time when Western statesmen expected to see Mr Malenkov in a more exalted capacity than that of chief of a delegation of experts on electricity. To this extent his visit to Britain is a reminder of his, possibly temporary, decline. Still, his present domain is vast. As Soviet minister of electricity he is responsible for an output already larger than the combined British and German production and which should by 1960 reach half of the present American level.

The key role played by electric power in the economic development of Russia, or any other country, was emphasised by Mr Malenkov himself in his speech at the Soviet party congress. The basis of his argument is that the use of electric power in industry is both a yardstick of, and a determining factor in, the productivity of labour. The superior productivity of the American worker over his Soviet, or for that matter British, counterpart is largely due to the electrification of production processes. Since the Soviet Union can no longer rely on huge untapped reserves of labour, increased productivity is the chief means by which to catch up with America, and this will make heavy demands on electricity. The pace of expansion of electric power must be faster than that of industrial production as a whole; the last plan neglected this rule, but it is to be observed in the next five years.

While making no denial of the superior development of electricity resources in the United States, Mr Malenkov maintains that the Soviet Union can make up for this handicap within a short historical period. His optimism is based partly on the faster rate of growth in the Soviet Union. It took the United States 27 years—1913 to 1940—to step up electricity generation from 22 to 170 billion kWh a year. The Russians have made the same jump in the last twenty years and, if allowance is made for the years of war and reconstruction, it may be said to have taken them in reality half the time. According to Mr Malenkov, the Soviet economy now has an engineering industry capable of supplying the necessary equipment, and its fuel resources remain tremendous. ■
