Herr Hitler has been hoist into the saddle. It is now to be seen whether he can keep his seat, with Freiherr von Papen perched on the crupper behind him and digging in his East-Prussian spurs. For the steed is the German people—a mighty, apocalyptic beast which is just realising that it has recovered its strength. This strength is clearly going to be exerted now in some vigorous activity or other; but which activity is it to be? When General von Schleicher mounted, less than two months ago, his touch gave the great steed the sober feeling of being a powerful, patient cart-horse who, with this rider on his back, could and would put all his strength into climbing the long and steep and unsensational ascent which would lead him back at last to the pre-war level of economic prosperity. But what will the creature feel like now, when Hitler cracks his whip and von Papen applies his spurs, and they set him—with Hugenberg running behind and twisting his tail—to seek Eldorado at a gallop by one of those short-cuts that lead over hedges and ditches and chevaux-de-frise. Will the poor animal make a frantic effort and impale himself on the spikes? Or will he wildly plunge and rear and throw his riders and knock out some of the onlookers into the bargain?

The late Chancellor, General von Schleicher, fell last Saturday afternoon. The ground for his resignation was President von Hindenburg’s refusal to give him power to dissolve the Reichstag in the event of a motion of no-confidence. Thereupon, the President sent for Herr von Papen, and commissioned him to clear up the political situation within the framework of the Constitution and in agreement with the Reichstag. The result has been that President von Hindenburg appointed the Nazi leader, Herr Hitler, Chancellor of the Reich, and that Herr Hitler has formed a Ministry with the co-operation of Herr Hugenberg, the leader of the Nationalists. This new entente between the two parties of the Right was symbolised in the streets of Berlin by a joint torchlight procession of the Nazis and the Stahlhelmers, who greeted and were greeted by the new Chancellor as they marched past his window at the Chancellor’s Palace. ■
