Could a machine—for instance, the new Manchester computor or any foreseeable future refinements of it—ever be said to think? Could it be, as the newspapers already call it, a brain? This question, now far from academic, has been discussed in Mind, at special conferences here and abroad, and on the BSC’s Third Programme. It opens out into the further question: how far is it possible to go in constructing mechanical analogues of human behaviour without stripping man of everything that has been thought to be peculiarly his? Such machines are being constructed, still very primitive affairs, but further progress may be only a matter of technique. Every step in this joint advance of theory and practice will have another important aspect; it is bound to increase understanding, scientifically speaking, of the way the human brain works.

Some scientists have been interested not so much in whether machines which simulate higher human behaviour may be said to reproduce mental processes as in the practical uses to which such machines may be put. Chief among these is Dr Norbert Wiener, the distinguished American mathematician, a pioneer of the subject, to which he has given the name “Cybernetics,” or the theory of controls. Dr Wiener has constituted himself the prophet of a robot age for which he finds humanity morally and socially ill-prepared. “The Human Use of Human Beings” is the first of his writings on the subject to be published in England, but he is widely known in the United States.

His primary thesis is that the large-scale replacement of human beings in industry by machines of the new computor type is now only a matter of years. If the process goes on at a peacetime rate, he gives it twenty years; if war comes to speed it up, he gives it five years. The completely automatic operation of factories is even now a possibility. Further technical development will make it so economical compared with human labour that the latter, he thinks, will be displaced. Widespread unemployment and social unrest leading to a breakdown of the social order will follow unless industrial society finds a worthy employment for those of its members who are no longer needed for repetitive slave tasks. This Dr Wiener calls the second industrial revolution.

The picture may be technologically correct, but it strikes a sophisticated reader in the circumstances of today as crude, even naive. So it is with much of this book. It is required reading for anyone who wants to know what is going on, yet a good deal of patient sifting is needed to separate the information—Dr Wiener should appreciate the force of this word—from the irrelevancies. In a book of which the first nine chapters are professedly devoted to “the study of man as a communicative organism,” half a chapter is occupied by a discussion of the American patent law. A last very short chapter attempts nothing less than an account of the present state of religion and world politics. A similar lack of proportion is noticeable elsewhere in the book.

When all this has been said, the book is full of good things. Its very simplicity is ruggedly honest. Its rambling ease of manner both charms the reader and suggests to him fruitful lines of thought. As a populariser of difficult new scientific theories, Dr Wiener can hold his own with the best of his predecessors. ■
