How much has already been done can be seen by listing the points on which agreement has been reached. It is agreed that the Sudan is to have internal self-government immediately, though for the time being with a British Governor-General still in Khartoum. During the next three years, the Sudanese are to decide for themselves between complete independence and some other status. A Sudanese parliament and an all-Sudanese cabinet are to be created within the first year. International commissions are to be set up, one to supervise the elections, and one to assist the Governor-General, who, pending self-determination, is to govern the country on the advice of this commission and his Sudanese cabinet in combination. Egypt is to be represented on both the electoral commission and the Governor-General’s commission. Yet Egyptians do not seem happy at so much gained and at such reasonable prospects of tranquillity on their southern frontier.

The outstanding points of difference are now only three. One—that on which agreement seems nearest—concerns the special powers that shall remain to the Governor-General to take immediate action at a moment of emergency. The second is the rate at which Sudanisation of the administration, judiciary and security forces is to take place. Egypt demands that it shall be complete before the vote on self-determination is taken at the end of the three-year period, whereas the British think it impossible to fix a date for finding and training all the Sudanese administrators and technicians who will be needed.

The third point is the extent of the independence authority that the Governor-General shall have in respect of the Southern Sudan. Egyptians inquire, with all appearance of pertinence, why the British, who were originally ready to grant the Sudan full independence in 1953, are today holding out for interim guarantees for the inhabitants of the southern provinces. The answer is that apprehensions have reawakened in British minds about the future of the southern provinces, for whose politically innocent inhabitants they have a sincere feeling of responsibility. These apprehensions might die down in the course of three years of self-government, particularly if the southern deputies showed that they had learned how to assure themselves an adequate say in their own affairs. But if, when that time comes, they feel no such confidence, it might be too late to ensure that they would decide for a united Sudan. ■
