THE past week must be one of the worst within the recollection of Wall Street, and the panic among the well-to-do of New York has been almost without parallel. Leading bankers at first almost lost their nerves in the general tension and excitement, but the Secretary of the Treasury has come forward with Government funds, while Mr Morgan and other important men have done something to support markets and to check the panic.

The crisis was started by notice from the National Bank of Commerce, which had acted as Clearing-house agent for the Knickerbocker Trust, that it would no longer act in that capacity after Tuesday. The Trust had recently lost credit by the enforced resignation of its president, and the vice-presidents hardly commanded public confidence. Roosevelt’s attacks on the “Trusts,” and the attempted establishment of similar organisations in this country, have associated a particular meaning with the word, but the Knickerbocker Trust is in no sense a combination in restraint of trade. In the world of credit it plays the part of a free trader or a smuggler, for it competes with the banks without being hampered by their regulations.

In a trust company security is subordinated to profit. In a bank profit is (or ought to be) subordinated to security. The Trust Company seeks deposits, which may be drawn by cheque, and allows interest on daily balances. This last feature, and also a less severe obligation to keep reserves, distinguish them from ordinary banks. In 1903 the New York Clearing Banks refused to clear for Trust companies which did not agree to hold a certain proportion of their deposits in reserve; last year the State Legislature fixed the proportion at 15 per cent. On September 28th the Knickerbocker Trust held £12,500,000 of deposits, its capital being only 1,200,000 dollars. The dividend was recently raised from 40 to 50 per cent., with a bonus.

The scene on Tuesday has been described in many newspaper telegrams. The “rush for gold” began as soon as the doors were opened. Dollars in gold, silver, and paper were poured into the branches by motor-cars, milk wagons, gas trucks, and private carriages. Piles of money were stacked in the office, and hundred and thousand dollar notes in the windows. These had no effect, and depositors fought their way to the tellers’ cages. At noon the announcement, first made at the Fifth Avenue branch, that the Trust would insist on its five days’ notice for certificates, roused emphatic protests. When £1,600,000 had been paid out in three hours the cash in the vaults failed, and the doors were shut. ■
