As the election campaign goes into its last week, the Republicans are making imaginative use of the special political advantages which are available to a party in office. The President has never, it is said, cut so effective a figure in public as when on Monday night he presided over the Cabinet meeting which was the first ever to be televised. It heard Mr Dulles explain how, with Sir Anthony Eden, to whom he gave generous credit, he had united Europe. On the same night the President went to a “non-partisan” gathering armed with the outcome of a weekend of frantic revolution by the electronic brain which works out the unemployment figures: the answer for October, which would otherwise not have been given until after the election, was a total of only 2,700,000 unemployed, a drop of over 400,000 in a month. If the Republicans had a normal margin to spare, they might be saved from defeat by their President; but it will be a sensational political achievement if he can prevent even a slight erosion of their strength—and that would be enough to put them in the minority in Congress.

For, with both the Senate and the House of Representatives already almost evenly balanced, the Republicans cannot afford the losses habitually suffered by the party in power in mid-term congressional elections, when there is no presidential contest to draw voters to the polls. In such years it is the discontented who put their protests on the ballot papers; the satisfied stay at home. This explains why it is the Republicans who are now concerned about widespread apathy among voters, which the President himself has just officially recognised; it used to be Democratic working men and women who did not bother to vote. But the Republicans are by far the smaller party and to win they must attract votes from outside.

Many people argue that the unusually deep apathy this year results not from satisfaction, but from disenchantment with the Republican record and with the low level on which the campaign is being fought. Election speeches have concentrated far too often on past scandals and on Communist infiltration into government under the Democrats; constructive comments have been noticeable for their absence. If this assessment is sound, then it was certainly an inspiration to bring the Cabinet to the people, for it dramatised the success of the Administration’s work for peace.

The equally unprecedented advance announcement of the unemployment figures indicates, if the electronic brain has not been over-optimistic in its hurry, that there has been a more than seasonal fall. Most of the other encouraging figures that have been pouring out lately are explained by the usual autumn rise in economic activity, which has if anything come a little late this year. But the drop in unemployment gives immediate and practical reality to the President’s prediction that the United States is entering on another period of expansion. ■
