The immediate food problem with which the American Government is very painfully struggling is how much grain the United States can export this year without causing domestic food prices to be at levels destructive to the economy and to the political situation. The export goal of the Department of Agriculture has been 470 million bushels, the Cabinet committee has suggested 570 million bushels, and good international relations and humanitarianism both suggest more—Congressman Taber’s outrageous Berlin statement that he could find no one in Europe ill-fed to the contrary notwithstanding. Food prices are already dangerously high, with only about half of the Department of Agriculture’s programme accomplished—dangerously high for future economic stability and dangerously high for the fate of whichever political party is tagged with the blame in next year’s election. And dangerously high for foreign relations, though the effect of American prices abroad is often exaggerated, since so large a proportion of food is obtained at prices having no relation to those here. The level of prices received by farmers on September 15th was 18 per cent above a year ago, 22 per cent above the highest point reached after the first war, and 286 per cent of the 1910-1914 average.

In this situation, President Truman has appointed a Citizens’ Committee headed by Mr Luckman to devise a programme, and, working with other governmental groups, to get it into effect. Discussions of what the programme may contain when it is formulated cover a wide range of subjects. Emphasis will almost certainly be given to less waste of food, and this has decided potentialities, as one bushel saved per head would make an enormous difference. The programme may not go so far as Mr Taft’s thoroughly valid but politically inept suggestion that the American people should eat less. It will almost certainly include substantial efforts to curb the feeding of grain, especially of wheat, to livestock; the threat here to supplies and prices is very great owing to the short corn crop and the very high prices and great demand for meat. A programme to curtail the use of grain by the distillers is already under way. And efforts are also under way to curtail speculation, with the Chicago and other main exchanges agreeing to a new variable scale of margin requirements. Export controls will also be tightened.

Whether these moves will be sufficient remains to be seen. Voluntary efforts, including the late Newburyport plan, have a scant record of success. This doubt has led some people to urge the reimposition of price controls and rationing, at least for certain items. But quite aside from political doubts, based on grounds both of domestic and of international relations, there is a very great question whether price control and rationing would work. The hypothetical case for them is very strong, but planners are learning, as physical scientists long ago learned, that what goes well on paper too often goes very badly in life. ■
