Space travel is technically possible. Its eventual development appears to be inevitable. But its impact on the human race and the scale upon which an inter-planetary transport industry might operate are still matters for conjecture. Whether journeys into outer space can become more than exploratory depends on technical developments yet undreamed of, but it is no longer in dispute that modern rocket technology can, if required, provide the means of making such journeys.

The science of rocketry on which practical space travel depends is precise and predictable, based firmly on the established theory of ballistics. There is a belt of comparatively “solid” atmosphere around the earth which grows progressively less dense, until at altitudes of about 20 miles it can no longer hold up an aeroplane or feed its engines with oxygen; but there is no theoretical limit to the heights that a rocket could reach. It does not need the atmosphere to hold it up, and its fuels carry their own oxygen. A rocket rises like a shell, in a smooth parabola, and gravity draws it back to earth when it begins to lose speed.

If a rocket were to start its flight from a point on the earth’s surface, and climb to a height well clear of the earth’s atmosphere, 500 miles or more up, then, provided it were moving fast enough, it would not meet the earth again on the downward leg of its flight, but would shoot past the curving surface into space. As it went past, the forces of gravity would come to bear on it and swing the rocket round like a horse on the long-rein. Acceleration in the order of 25,000 miles an hour is needed to launch a rocket into space, but cruising speeds of around 11,000 miles an hour are sufficient to keep it there.

Such a rocket would be too far and too fast for gravity to bring it back to earth, but not fast enough to break free. A rocket in space will never lose velocity because it meets no air resistance, and having no further need for power it would become an artificial satellite orbiting endlessly round the world. Temporary orbits for rockets could be set up closer to the earth, at roughly any altitude above 100 to 200 miles. The force of gravity would quite soon overcome the velocity of such a rocket and pull it down to earth; but for research purposes a perpetually-orbiting rocket would not be essential.

To build and launch an unmanned artificial planet on these lines would be well within the reach of present rocket technology, if a sufficiently strong case could be made to justify the experiment. The subsequent stages of space travel are less clearcut. One school of thought believes that the launching of orbiting rockets will be followed by the construction of “space stations,” big enough to accommodate sizeable crews and workshops, with space ships assembled from components ferried up from the earth in rockets. This, for a number of reasons, seems improbable.

It seems more likely that the launching of instrument-carrying rockets will be followed by cautious experiments with manned rockets, still operating as artificial planets round the earth. Once a rocket is moving in its orbit, it should not need a great deal of power to break free of the restraining pull of gravity and head for the planets. The nearest heavenly body is the moon, 250,000 miles away, and this stage of space travel is generally visualised as a series of exploratory voyages round the moon and in the space surrounding the earth.

Planets like Mars (never nearer than 34.5 million miles) and perhaps also Venus (26 million miles) appear to have the kind of atmosphere that might make life slightly easier, although there is no evidence that they have any oxygen. But the journey to either would follow a route roughly 100 million miles long and take approximately five months. The size of rocket required to carry provisions for a voyage of this duration suggests that it will be outside the scope of space travel for a long time. ■
