In order to understand the feelings in Austria-Hungary after the Sarajevo murders, evils to which this country has already been subjected at the hands of her small neighbour in the South-East must be taken into account. There can be no doubt that Servia’s policy for more than ten years past has been directed towards the ultimate end of wresting such regions as are inhabited by Serbs from Austria-Hungary, and that she has perhaps even hoped to gain the entire Southern Slavonic territory now incorporated with the Monarchy. The thought alone that the neighbouring State entertains such projects destroys all confidence and finality, absolutely preventing the enjoyment of the full measure of peace and quiet.

To this is added the fact that Servia employs in her fight against the Monarchy means that are not considered usual in political conflicts, and that have been banned in all civilised States from the first. Conspiracy and assassination are the principal weapons of the Servian State, and the Servian Press never ceases to recommend to the people of its country methods which would not find the approval of Europe. The murder of the Archduke Franz Ferdinand and his wife is the latest event in the bloody chapter of New Servian history.

Even the Russian Press did not doubt that the crime originated in Belgrade, in its first excitement over the dreadful news from Sarajevo. News from Belgrade has been repeatedly received showing that there was much satisfaction at the crime there; such proofs of complicity are not sufficient for the judge, but they are enough for the politician. Whoever has followed the seditious language of the Servian Press for years will not be surprised that persons educated in these opinions are ready to press murderous weapons into the hands of youths without moral resistance, weapons which were to serve for the murder of a Prince.

Whatever proofs the investigation of the Sarajevo murder may bring, the politico-moral proofs of Servian complicity are already there, and this is the explanation of the great excitement among the populace of Austria-Hungary. The Servian Press, it is true, makes efforts to prove that this excitement is unjustified and exaggerated, and it finds friends in Europe who are also of this opinion, and who blame the Monarchy bitterly for every step taken in its defence, even before it has been adopted. This all-too-zealous defence of the murderers of the Prince brings us to a number of questions. Would England permit agitation inimical to the State such as has been carried on in Bosnia from Belgrade to be prosecuted in Egypt or in India? Would the appearance of an English Prince in Egypt or India be characterised as a provocation of the natives? ■
