It has long been a commonplace that the bulk of the country’s expenditure on entertainment goes to the cinemas. But the second biggest entertainment industry is not so well recognised. Most people would imagine it to be broadcasting or commercialised sport, those “passive amusements that sap the initiative of youth.” In fact, it is ballroom dancing. Some 200 million attendances a year is probably a fair estimate for dancehalls of one kind or another, compared with only 80-90 million for football matches; £25 million a year is probably a conservative figure for the price of those attendances, while broadcasting revenue is a mere £15 million. As a social phenomenon, ballroom dancing is conspicuous enough; as an industry, the fact that it is organised in many small units instead of a few large ones keeps it out of the public eye in spite of its size.

The customers are predominantly between 17 and 25 years old. To dress up and mix with a large crowd, to dance with soft lights and sweet music, has an almost universal appeal for young workers. Certainly a well-run dance hall is nowadays as satisfactory an arrangement for boy to meet girl as any social worker could devise. The managements have striven hard to establish public dance halls as intensely respectable institutions; they have had to outface both the puritanical distrust of some of the older generation and the newspapers’ delight in the evil reputations of a few wartime trouble centres. On the whole they have succeeded, and the dance floor has become as much a part of national life as the maypole ever was.

Where do four million people find premises to dance in each week? It might seem a sheer impossibility if the advertisement pages of local newspapers did not indicate the enormous variety of dancing resorts. At the top of the scale are the grand Palais de Dance built for the purpose and holding anything up to a couple of thousand people, and the smaller halls built under restaurants or cinemas, which, like the older “assembly rooms,” will often take many hundreds of customers without straining the fire regulations. Besides these ballrooms proper, which are said to number about five hundred, there are untold town halls and municipal baths whose big floors are hired out regularly throughout the winter for firms’ dances and charity balls; last but not least, there are some thousands of dancing schools, whose evening demonstration and practice classes are in effect public dances for anything from 30 to 100 people at a time. So there are plenty of choices, and every conceivable standard of dancing in all of them—with the exception of a few restaurants where expensive bands play to fashionable society, which by strict tradition shuffles round floors of pocket size. ■
