Most of the lay comment about the Stock Exchange is wrong. Nine-tenths of the population picture the City as a place where rich men have their flutter, and stockbrokers as people who grow fat by running a closed shop at the casino. Some of the blame for such distortions lies not very far from Throgmorton Street itself. The City and the Stock Exchange have sat uncomfortably on the defensive and have done nothing to explain to a wide public that the dearth of investment in risk capital is a major threat to Britain’s industrial future—and hence to the nation’s standard of life. The pipeline itself, still of a mark manufactured for Victorian days, needs to be modernised.

If a new generation is to be induced to invest in industry a programme of active publicity will be the first need. It will have to set men arguing over their pints and women over their teacups whether they are concerned with the disappearance of savings and the imminent disappearance of a dynamic industry in Britain. It must demonstrate that an active stock exchange is the indispensable pipeline through which savings must flow to secure the replenishment of industry. As one feature of this campaign, the Stock Exchange should give its authority to a study of investment in Britain—as illuminating, if possible, as that recently cried out by the Brookings Institute on behalf of the New York Stock Exchange. This analysis ought to look behind nominee holdings; an up-to-date analysis of institutional investment would be a startling document in its own right.

Secondly, if new ideas about investment are to have a chance of popular acceptance, the City will have to go out of its way to court the good will of the trade unions. Some trade union leaders will regard any scheme for spreading the ownership of industry among all classes as a threat to their concept of Socialism. But there are thoughtful people in the Labour movement who recognise that the country must remain part-capitalist for many years, and cannot survive without risk capital. Such people cannot logically campaign against the need for attracting risk capital into whatever segments of industry the Government of the day leaves to private enterprise. ■
