“The Arctic and our northern regions have colossal wealth,” said Mr Stalin in 1936. “We must create a Soviet organisation which can in the shortest period include this wealth in the general resources of our Soviet structure.” The Russians have undoubtedly made remarkable efforts to develop their sector of the Arctic, but it is questionable whether the results have justified, or will ever justify, those efforts. What is certain is that they have not been inspired only, or even mainly, by economic possibilities. The strategic value of their Arctic waterways and, more recently, the idea of long-range transpolar warfare, have counted for at least as much in Russian minds.

Assessment of the progress made in the Soviet Arctic is rendered difficult not only by the fog of secrecy that enshrouds the region, but also by the conflict between sweeping claims made by official propagandists and the periodical charges of inefficiency, sabotage and failure laid against those responsible for Arctic development. Much of the available information has been collected and published by Dr Terence Armstrong of the Scott Polar Research Institute at Cambridge. His book, “The Northern Sea Route,” is primarily concerned with the coast of Siberia, but it also provides a new picture of the general economy of the Siberian Arctic and many clues to this vast area’s secrets.

It is, indeed, a vast area. Little of European Russia lies north of the Arctic Circle; but in Asia Russia possesses territories almost as large as western Europe. They are thinly peopled, but include several towns of up to 40,000 inhabitants. Coal, oil, nickel, copper, graphite, tin, gold and salt are among the minerals that have been worked. Fish abound in the rivers, furs are plentiful and the timber is virtually inexhaustible. Yet the results obtained in Arctic Siberia do not compare with those in the north-west, where Vorkuta coal and Kola iron, nickel and apatite have been made the bases for large settlements. The main obstacle to the development of the Siberian Arctic is lack of communications. ■
