General Eisenhower will not take the oath of office until the week after next, but the new Republican Congress elected with him is already organised and in session. This is the first time since the Twentieth Amendment altered the constitutional timetable that there will have been a change of President in January, and it is therefore also the first time that there has been this strange interlude while an incoming Congress has to deal with an outgoing President. The interval is largely occupied by the annual series of Presidential messages to Congress, on the state of the union, on the budget and on the economic outlook, and in the circumstances it was inevitable that these messages should take on the character of a valedictory review. A world that is waiting for President Eisenhower’s inaugural speech has to pause for a moment and look back.

There is justice in this, for it would be wrong to let Mr Truman and his colleagues slip into private life without some attempt to assess what they have done. Nor need this be taken as disrespect to the new President. Now that the excitement of the election campaign is over, the free world is well content with its result; irrespective of personal merits, it is clearly a good thing, both for America and for its allies, that, after twenty years, there should be a change of party in power in Washington. General Eisenhower, by his conduct since the election, has largely laid to rest the doubts that were evoked in Europe by some of the incidents of the campaign.

It has become the fashion in America, in circles far wider than the Republican Party, to write Mr Truman off as a poor President. Distance lends, if not enchantment, at least a different perspective, and from this side of the Atlantic such a comprehensive verdict seems unfair. Mr Truman is, indeed, a fascinating study. The one certain thing is that his has not been a mediocre presidency; for his good things have been very good and his gaffes historic. When the time comes to erect a statue to him in Washington, it will have to be a Janus-like figure with two aspects, the domestic politician and the statesman who has borne the responsibility of the world’s most powerful nation with courage and wisdom. ■
