SINCE last week millions of men have been drawn from the field and the factory to slay one another by order of the war lords of Europe. It is perhaps the greatest tragedy of human history. We have watched the increasing rivalry of armaments with consternation, have implored our Government to convene the nations of Europe, and seek to arrest the mischief before it was too late. It is now too late. The explosion has come. Look where you may you can see no comfort. Death, anguish, starvation, and despair are written over Western Europe. As if the Balkans had not been enough, hell has been let loose among the most civilised nations of Europe. It is the triumph of diplomacy over common sense, of force over reason, of brutality over humanity.

When we wrote last week the great question was whether Great Britain should stand neutral or be engaged herself in the war. At that time the arguments for neutrality seemed to us overwhelming, and we were supported in that view by many Cabinet Ministers as well as of such experienced statesmen and leaders of opinion as Earl Loreburn, Lord Bryce, Lord Courtney, Lord Welby, Lord Shuttleworth, and Mr Thomas Burt. By the end of the week, however, the opposition to a war policy in the Cabinet was reduced to Lord Morley, Mr John Burns, Mr Harcourt, Lord Beauchamp, and Sir John Simon. The last three were persuaded to remain and to take the responsibility for the ultimatum and the declaration of war against Germany. Lord Morley, Mr John Burns, and Mr Charles Trevelyan, a junior Minister who felt with them, have resigned for the simple and adequate reason that they could not conscientiously stand before their countrymen in support of this policy.

The reasons and motives of it were expounded to the House of Commons by Sir Edward Grey on Monday afternoon, and a large amount of diplomatic matter, illustrating his part in the hasty negotiations of the last fortnight, has been published in the form of a White Paper. These selections, the speeches of Sir Edward Grey and Mr Asquith, with some sidelights thrown by Reuter’s correspondent in St Petersburg, are all the material which the public at present possesses for forming an opinion as to the responsibility for the war. Our diary of events is intended to give a conspectus of the facts, and we shall endeavour as time goes on to inform our readers on the causes of this portentous tragedy.

Meanwhile nothing has been published to throw doubt upon our view that the murder at Sarajevo, the Austrian revenge, and the Russian mobilisation were the first causes. Then came what can only be described as the frenzied action of the rulers of Germany upon the refusal of the Russian Government to stay the order for mobilisation. After that militarism was in power throughout Europe, and military strategy overcame all other considerations. The Germans occupied Luxembourg, and determined to pursue their plan of invading France through Belgium. It was on this point, after a rapid exchange of views, that our Government delivered their ultimatum and declared war. In the midst of this calamity it will be a consolation to many to reflect that though British life and treasure incalculable are to be sacrificed, the purpose of the Government is a determination to defend the small nationalities of Europe against aggression and oppression. ■
