A hundred years ago the choice, by a minority vote, was Abraham Lincoln; then the cleavage ran across his own American land, and soon became bloody civil war. Now the cleavage runs across the world; and, by a paper-thin margin of the American people's votes, the choice for United States President and so for leader of the West, is John Kennedy, youngest President ever to be elected and the first Catholic. Mr Kennedy reads history earnestly; he knows (and Mr Nixon has reminded him) that, by ill fate, each time the Democrats have captured the White House from the Republicans in this century world war has sucked in the United States during their tenancy; it has indeed been the core of his claim to be chosen that, by strenuously mobilising all the material (and military) strength and the moral (and diplomatic) purpose of the United States in advance of the calamity, he can hope this time to save world peace, and a good life for free men. Behind the election gimmicks, it is a young man’s sincere hope—and, in the rising, even strident, accents of aspiring leadership, a young man’s boast, too. But it did not sweep the country. Mr Kennedy gained the popular vote by less than one per cent.

The contest was desperately close-run in the end, despite the wider margin reflected in the electoral votes of the states. The popular vote for the Presidency showed a “house divided” into two practically equal blocks. Mr Nixon, who could never hope to eat into the Democratic majority in the country as President Eisenhower did so hugely, with his paternal appeal from beyond the party battle, did astonishingly well to come so near to the consummation of his deep-set and so dogged political ambition. The Democratic party lost seats in both halves of Congress, as was expected, but the victory really belongs to it. In the event, the voters have chosen to return to one-party rule. The Democrats next year will have not only Congress, but the Presidency as well; this is the end, for a while, of the coalition habit, the split-ticket choice of one monarchial man to represent America in the world and a party of another political colour to run affairs at home. It will be plain where the responsibility for American policy lies; and it is a gain, in the world and in America, that this should be so—just as it is a gain both that a taboo against a creed has been broken by the election of a Catholic president and that it can be shown that in the greatest of democracies the rulers may be changed without weakening the national will.

The change in political and personal terms can be large. As President, Mr Kennedy will have, as Mr Nixon would not have had, a formally friendly alliance with Congress at the outset (though he will have the reactionaries to cope with, in both parties); and, in the Administration, there will be a new generation—a whole new cast of players with new parts. Yet one thing is quite certain: in the world policies that affect us all, it will be a change of degree, not of kind; of mood and attitude and outlook, not of direction. The narrow defeat of Mr Nixon, and the honest, brashly denunciatory rhetoric of the winner, must not obscure the fact that, during the Eisenhower epoch that is now ending, the United States consistently recognised, sometimes with startling liberality, its new obligations in the world. What the President-elect can claim, as he does claim vehemently, is not that he will do differently, but that he will do very much better. And, whatever the qualifications, the point is that he has won.

Mr Kennedy’s claim, historically an impudent one, is that the Democrats, both at home and therefore abroad, will be vastly more efficient than the Republicans. They will be “active” not “passive.” Instead of just “holding the line,” they will “advance the frontiers”: of the American economy and its social opportunities and public provisions; of America’s armed strength in concert with its allies; of America’s diplomacy on the basis of that strength in pursuit of peace; and of the positive American contribution to world development. It is a big bid, with a big bill to foot. No more than any other country can even the United States spend in the sixties the wealth it may hope to have in the eighties; and the eager Democrats will find, when they get to Washington, that even the United States has in these days to look to its balance of payments.

It is natural and sensible to welcome America’s hair’s-breadth choice on Tuesday. There is a rhythm in the affairs of a democracy, a sequence of pauses for consolidation and fresh bursts of energy. There is no need or cause to decry unduly what the Eisenhower regime has done, both in the world and in holding the line at home well to the liberal side of old-time Republican reaction. But the time has come in the United States, as indeed in Britain or in west Germany, for a new dose of adventure and imagination in coping with the mortal perils and high opportunities of the twentieth-century world, which is being transformed at the rate of a revolution by technical and social change. Mr Kennedy, in the generalities of the hustings, has promised precisely that. ■
